Katie Borromeo
CSSE313: Artificial Intelligence
Dr. Wollowski
Sudoku Assignment: Is it Intelligent?

Since the dawn of time, mankind has continually reprised the question of what makes us different from every other living thing we know of.
For a long time, that extra quality that humanity has was considered our intelligence. The question of what defines intelligence has similarly
been reworked countless times as more and more artificial creations get closer to emulating that elusive thing that makes humans unique.
Even today, psychologists and philosophers each define intelligence differently. Some consider it the ability to create good responses from
the point of view of truth or facts. Others recognize it as having the ability to learn to adjust oneself in the environment. Still more define
it as, basically, the capacity for knowledge, or the capacity to acquire capacity. Although the idea of intelligence is constantly in flux,
there remains a common thread throughout every psychologist and philosopher’s ideas: intelligence, for the purposes of this paper, is adaptable
and inseparable from the concept of learning.

To investigate the intelligence of our sudoku problem solver, we must first understand what it does. In short, the sudoku code can solve sudoku
puzzles much faster than a human. From this simple fact, we can come up with the conclusion that the sudoku problem solver is smart. After all,
sudoku puzzles can be difficult, and you must be relatively smart to solve some of the hard ones. But here is where opinions can already start to
diverge. Does smart equal intelligent? The answer to that question is, of course, it depends on how you define smart and intelligent, but using the
definition of intelligent we established earlier, we will say that no, smart does not equal intelligent. Just because this program can solve
difficult problems quickly does not mean that it demonstrates any qualities of intelligence. The most difficult problem could eventually be solved
using a brute-force method, but does that make a brute-force algorithm intelligent? No. Therefore, the sudoku solver’s talent for solving sudoku
problems does not itself indicate that the program is intelligent.

Even more important than what the program does is how it achieves its goals. This sudoku solver is, of course, a backtracking algorithm that
evaluates possible solutions in a depth-first search of the tree of possible sudoku board states. To put it more frankly, this algorithm is a
specific, fast searching algorithm. It does not make decisions, rather guesses decisions and evaluates the resulting consequences of those guesses.
The sudoku solver does not consider putting a 1 beside another 1 to be a bad decision until after it has tried to put a 1 beside another 1 and realized
that would make the puzzle incorrect. This method of solving puzzles has no capacity to learn. The sudoku solver will never improve its method of
solving puzzles, only improve its solutions. This means that there is no capacity to learn present, no capacity for knowledge, and therefore the sudoku
solver cannot possibly be intelligent.

To make for a better philosophical argument, I refrained from referring to the solver as a program or algorithm, but that is ultimately what the sudoku
solver is. It is an algorithm that uses a specific tactic to achieve its goals. It has no ability to self-reflect, no way of retaining information
between runs, nothing that could prove it thinks at all, as it rather attempts then outputs steps as it builds a solution. Therefore, it must be
concluded that the sudoku solving algorithm is not intelligent.
